Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Carl Johann Palmquist. He's
a researcher in the department of philosophy at Lund
University. And today we're talking about his book Semi-secular
Worldviews and the Belief in Something Beyond. So Dr.
Palmquist, welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you very much. Thank you for having me.
It's Uh, it's really fun to be here and
I, uh, look forward to our conversation.
Likewise. So er could you start by telling us
a little bit about the premise of your book
and what got you interested in these kinds of
topics as a philosopher?
Well, uh, the book is, um, uh, philosophical take
on, uh, the contemporary worldviews, uh, which are neither
traditionally religious or, uh, Atheists, uh, but somewhere, somewhere
in between, we call them semi-secular. And uh another
name for that is spiritual but not religious. Uh,
SO, uh, what's, um, Unique about the the take.
In this book is that uh instead of uh
that we look at it from a philosophical angle,
uh, this, um. These kind of worldviews, uh, have,
uh, mostly been studied by social scientists and scholars
of religion before and not very much from, uh.
Philosophical perspective, uh, so we try to, to Expand
the, the borders of philosophy of religion. Uh, A
bit, um, by, um. Uh Taking a close look
at these views and asking roughly the same question
to these views as we traditionally, uh, used to
ask to, uh, like Christian ideas um or uh.
Uh, OR other, uh, standard religious ideas. Uh. So,
um, Yeah, and we, we got this um. This
idea from um Well, it began with a previous
study where we This, uh, uh, dissertation about semi-secular,
uh, people from the Swedish sociologist Annof Burian, uh,
who claimed that some of these, uh, uh, people,
they have, um, Different incompatible ideas at the same
time, uh, and that seems like a very interesting
topic to start it from a philosophical perspective. Especially
if you're an epistemologist, uh, like me, this, you
will, uh, It Uh, well, it seems that this,
this is the kind of, of question which raises
this, these, these issues raises, uh, interesting questions about
rationality and, and so forth. Uh, I became interested
in and then uh we kind of expanded this
into a uh. And I took a more broad
approach, uh, um, and then, and I. Cambridge University
Press commissioned a uh This element. The sort of
book that we have done them. So yeah, so
it's uh but the. I think that the, the,
the um Background here is just that. There seems
to be a lot of interesting questions, especially when
it comes to Rationality which are raised by this
fuses it's uh and it's an unexplored field so
it's a like yeah. Um, Also a good opportunity
to expand the philosophy of religion a bit, I
would say, yeah. Mhm.
Yeah, and we're going to explore, uh, most of
the questions, the topics you pointed to there. So,
uh, but just to get it first into the
kind of framework you apply in your book, uh,
the sort of theoretical framework, uh, what is worldview
theory?
So yeah, worldview theory is a conceptual framework used
for understanding uh different outlooks uh on life or
on, uh, on the world, uh, and it has
been developed, uh, well, the point with worldview theory
is that it should include All kinds of worldviews
which not just include. Uh, FOR example, religious worldviews,
so it's uh It's often used like in, in,
uh, if it's been used to broaden, for example,
religious. Education and other uh areas where where you
want to uh have this broad perspective and you,
you, and so, uh. So it's um. And I
thought Also comes with this idea that um worldviews
have different parts uh and different and that they
could be like partial or more complete and so
forth so it's but the basic concept is, is
uh the basic idea with the concept is to,
to get to capture. All kinds of outlooks on
life and, and to make no big distinction really
between, between religious and secular and or semi-secular for
that matter.
But what is a worldview? How do you define
it?
Well, I think that there are at least two
senses of the worldview which are. And I think
that these senses are some, sometimes conflated, uh, because
first we have this uh worldview uh in the
Sense of being an all-encompassing coherent take on the
world which is like official and which many people
have worked on to, to, to produce like, you
know, uh, Catholicism or Marxism or something, yeah, that's
a word in one sense, one word and then
we, we have this other personal sense where we
have a spec it means a specific person's outlook.
Uh, SPECIFIC individuals take on, on life and the
world, uh, and this can be, I mean, they
can be like just a personal version of one
of these big worldviews so they can be more
of, you know, uh, um, a remix of different
sources. They can be more or less articulate, uh,
I mean, obviously a very reflective person will have
a much more elaborate worldview than a person who
doesn't. Think very much uh before he or she
acts. So it's like Uh, So I think that
these are the two basic um Basic uh things
we can mean by world, either this big cluster.
See, by ideas or this personal take, take on
the world. Um, SO what we are trying to
do in, in, uh, in this book is that
we're trying to take this, um, what people said
about the worldviews in sociological studies and so forth,
the same, same secular people, and then we have
tried to Look beyond that and say, what, what
bigger worldview this or uh implied here, so to
speak.
Right, uh, and there are those people who are
referred to as the nuns. Um, I think that,
uh, if I'm not mistaken, social scientists use this
term. I mean, who are the nuns?
Yeah, yes, you're, you're correct. That's, that's a term
from social scientists, uh, and the, the nouns are,
um. Basically people who does not identify with any
major traditional religion, uh, it uh, it's the term
has been, uh, especially, uh. Widely used in an
English speaking and perhaps also American context, um. And
it's uh. Um, IN, in, in this big, uh,
American, um, uh, surveys about people's, uh, orientation in
life, uh. And then there, so, so one of
4 points is that the Uh, the nouns or
they might be, uh, uh, if you're. Uncareful, you
might get the impression that nuns are non-religious, uh,
but they, and that the reaction of traditional religion.
Means that they are instead atheists or that they
are uh Fully secular and uh one of the
uh um but instead we have this great diversity
of semi-secular views which are in between traditional religion
and And atheism and these people are knowns as
well. Uh, EVEN though of course the atheists are
nouns because they react traditional religion, so, but yeah,
yeah.
Uh, DO we know exactly how many atheists are
really out there? I mean, of course, I imagine,
uh, uh, uh, it's not only that, I imagine,
it's a matter of fact, I think that, uh,
it depends on the country we're talking about. But,
but, uh, do we have percentages? I mean, uh,
uh, global percentages and, uh, the exact percentages by
country of how many people are actually atheists?
Yeah, yeah, I, I mean, uh, that's something sociologists
investigate a lot and uh Uh I think that
the uh One of the things that um um.
Strike, uh. I, uh, I was a bit surprised
to learn what was, uh, how relatively few. Atheists
there are. Uh, AS compared to the semi-secular group.
Uh, SO I mean I'm from, uh, Sweden which
is, uh, regarded as a highly secularized, secularized country
and even we got no more than like 20%
right atheists. Right, which is a bit more than
the traditionally religious group. Uh, BUT, uh, still it's
like this. More than, we, we got more than
50% of, of, of here in Sweden which are
uh We, we can define as semi-secular, which are
neither in this. Bigger bit of awe, and I,
I think that in, in um In other countries
it will presumably be the traditional religious part of
the population which might be a bit higher than
in Sweden, but Uh, the athes will presumably not
have many more atheists, and the big group in
the middle will be. Uh, uh, YEAH, uh, still
the lowest group, even if, if, if it has
been said that it's a bit bigger in Scandinavia
than in other parts of. Western society, so.
Yeah, but, but this is a debated topic among
sociologists of religion, right, about how, how we actually
determine exactly what's the percentage or what's the number
of atheists out there, because there might be some
people who just because they're not traditionally. Religious, they
might be identified by other people or might identify
themselves as atheists, but then, as a matter of
fact, they have more of a semi-secular worldview or
I mean they are somewhere in between religious and
atheist,
right? Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean you're definitely right
there and I mean these are. Um A matter
of definition in some senses, uh, atheism and uh
Naturalism or sometimes used as, as, uh, if they
were synonyms even though athe was strictly only uh
implied that you do uh do not believe in.
In God and some might use atheism to say
that they do not believe in. The Christian God
while they believe in other godlike things, uh, so
it's, uh, um, I mean, um. So these are,
are tricky matters and especially if you're a sociologist,
you will presumably and, and work with quantitative methods,
you will. I guess, uh, not have, have the,
the The space in your surveys to go into
exactly what it is. Means, and that's where the,
the, the numbers, they can get a bit, um,
I think. It can easily get a bit tricky
to, to, to sort this out exactly how many
atheists are and exactly what we mean by, by
atheists, uh, but, uh. Um That being said, I
think that it, it is fairly uh well established
right now that uh this kind of uh semi-secular
or fussi religion is a middle position between, between.
The fully secular and the traditional religion that is,
is In fact, uh, The majority view or close
to the majority view in in most The big,
big part of, of, of Western society. Mhm.
Yeah, and I think it's important to mention here,
I mean, you briefly touched on that point that,
uh, I, being an atheist, it's just a matter
of, uh, not believing in gods or other sort
of or other sorts of divine entities because in
terms. In terms of epistemology more broadly, it doesn't
necessarily tie you to, for example, naturalism or materialism.
You could be an atheist and a non-materialist or
non-naturalist, right? So I mean those are different things,
epistem are different things, but they are which are
often. Conflated when we speak about them.
Mhm, YEAH, yeah, that I think that's a very
important point to make. So, um, uh, and what
about those people who say that they are not
religious but are spiritual? I mean, what does it
mean to be spiritual but not religious?
Well, that's, uh, that's a term which are uh
which is kind of prevalent in, in uh. In
North America and So it's once again, uh, a,
um, and it's kind of tied to the idea
of the nouns, so it's, uh, it's, uh, that
from that kind of, from that context, uh, but
that, what, what people who identify as spiritual but
not religious often mean by that, uh. Uh, IS
that they are not traditionally religious. Both At the
same time, they do not want to embrace. Naturalist.
Mhm. Right, uh, or they have, they, uh, I
think that, uh, that, that they want, um. To
signify that they believe that there is. More, uh.
In, uh, in life in some sense than, than,
um. Fully, uh, secularized, uh, naturalist would, would care
to admit, and many of these people, in fact,
would qualify as religious by many academic definitions of
what religion is. Uh, SO it's, uh, so the,
the religious in this case should be, be read
as traditionally religious. Perhaps even Christian, so um. Spiritual
but not Christian would perhaps be a better, uh,
better way of describing.
Yeah, so it might be the case. I mean
it might follow along the lines of what I
even talked about just a minute ago. They might
actually not even believe in gods or divine entities,
but they believe in something that is above the
natural, like supernatural, supernatural, or something like that, that
we can reduce reality to just the world, the
worldview of naturalism. Correct.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I think you're correct there. So,
um.
Uh, SO, um, philosophically and in this particular case,
epistemologically, how do you approach semi-secular worldviews?
Well, uh, Of course, there's this when you try
to approach. These kinds of subjects as a philosopher,
there's uh a lot of methodological issues uh you
have to face which um you do not have
to face if you are interested in, in traditional
religion because The semi-secular or the spiritual but not
religious, they do not have, they're not very organized,
um, they do not have uh churches or official
theological creeds and so forth. Uh, BUT they have
been, uh, studied and quite intensively studied by, uh,
sociologists and other social scientists. So. Uh, THE method,
uh, here is to, to go to the, um,
results of the social sciences and then try to,
to, uh, I mean, the social scientists are not,
they're not, uh, they like to, uh, understand what
people believe about that, uh, the significance of that
work, the lives and so forth, but they're not
very interested in. Trying to Uh, pick out the,
the. The uh fuller uh picture of what is,
uh, that is implied in what is being Said,
uh, so the method is one of, uh, of
a rational reconstruction. We have to make this a
more Uh, charitable reading and ask yourself, what does
it imply when someone says stuff like, Uh, I
do not believe in, in God, but I do
believe in something. What could that mean? Uh, AND
what, uh, what, uh, large reviews. Uh, IS it
reasonable to, to, to connect to these statements? Uh,
AND I will say that, I mean, this might
sound like a a lot of. Uh, IS that
not too, too, too far away from what people
are saying, but I, I would say that it's
really the same thing as most philosophers of religion
do when they. Uh, PEOPLE say that they believe
in God, I mean. Then the philosopher of religion
instantly begins to, to discuss perfect being this with
this uh very specific concept of God in mind.
Uh, I mean, so, so that's, there's always this.
Kind of gap between what people actually say and
the large reviews which are, are uh implied which
can be uh Inferred from what he said, uh,
and, uh, not all persons, of course, might be
really conscious of the connections or might agree with,
uh, so what, so, so, so what. So it's
important to say that we are not like trying
to uh Recreate something people have in their minds,
but we're trying to uhpolate uh this uh larger
worldviews which are uh. And, uh, philosophically interesting also,
yeah, because, um So we try to try to
reach this more um Um, yeah More abstract, more,
more, uh, hopefully, uh, coherent and, and elaborate views
which, which are, uh, suitable, uh, subject for philosophical
inquiry, uh, and which we can, which we think
that we can find in this, uh, sociological material.
Mhm.
Yes, because I mean I've I've talked with many
scientists of religion on the show and of course
even uh the ideas or the traits that people,
just common people might attribute to God or whatever
they believe their God is might even be completely
different. From, uh, the more abstract, more intellectually elaborate
ideas that theologians, priests, and philosophers have of what
God is. So I mean that that's I guess
an important point to make, um, but I mean,
uh, when it comes to this idea of believing
in something and in the book you call it
somethingism, um, I mean, are there different types of
somethingism?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, the, uh, what we have, um.
So, firstly, something is um very basically is, is,
is the view that's Which simply says that something
exists. I mean, that's not very. Informative, uh, but,
uh, to, to, to, to understand a little bit
more what, what it's about, it's important to, to,
to, to say that it's often the answer to
the question, do you believe in God? No, but
I believe in something. Mhm. So that's all, that's
kind of the context for you. Express your belief
in something. Uh, And then we can see that
this is not just any platitude, which it might.
Uh, IT'S unlikely if you are not aware of
the context, but it's, it's, uh, the idea that
there, uh, Exists something which is not. The traditional
God, uh, but which is also not, nothing, I
mean, it's, if you, if you do not believe
in God and you're just a fully secular, you,
you say no to the question you believe in
if you believe in God. So when you say
that you believe in something you. You're convey that
you believe in an alternative to the traditional God,
uh, something that's, uh, and perhaps not, uh, like
an alternative, like an alternative God, but something that
could take kind of this place as being, uh,
a truly, uh, significant, uh, part of the world
or part of your life. Which God is the
most the most significant. Being Uh So, so, uh.
What's implied is that When, when they say there's
something exists, they mean something. Of great, truly great
significance exists. Uh, AND, uh. THEN this could be
interpreted in. Some different ways. First of all, we
can, we could, we, it's, it's possible to think
of versions of something is where something is just.
It's part of the natural world, but it's not
like part of the everyday world, um, like we
could, um. Um, BUT think of, uh, for example,
special experience you have when you, uh, walk in
the. In nature, when you do yoga and so
forth, if you don't think that this is anything
to do with anything beyond reality, but it's, it's
still truly significant and and special. Right, and then
we have, have the more uh Uh The stronger
version where, where we think that something is. Transcendent
in the way like. The way God is, uh,
in the sense of being beyond. The natural world,
so not being like. Being part of, not being
part of the world describable by, by, by science
but beyond it in some sense. Mhm. So then
we have this supernatural or transcendent something. Uh, SO
that, that there's two different, different types. Uh That
we can see. And the, and, and there's also
um We also want to, to make this distinction
between because pure something is and qualify something is
and pure something is. IS when you only have
this belief, I believe in something, um, of great
significance which might be transmundane or might be transcendental,
but that's mostly a philosophically interesting idea because we
do not. Uh, AND we, and, and it's um.
It's discussed, uh, a lot, quite some late in
the book, but, uh, uh, it's not a very
common, uh. It's not very common by In, in
this pure form among uh the nuns, so to
speak, because they are most of them have some
form of what we call qualified somethings that is
something with, with some details, some other ideas connected
to it or some practices connected to it which
Which makes it uh. Uh Like a true kind
of halfway house between, between traditional views and uh
or more a fully detailed views and it's vague
um some. Something is, and then we, we, some
people, they are. Between traditional religion and pure something
where they have it like this. Uh, SOME, there's
something they believe in. Uh, RELATED in some way
to, to. Traditional religion, it could be that uh
I believe in something like a great life force
which Um Empowers the weak or something. Uh, AND
I mean that's kind of close to, to, to
God in, in, uh, Christianity, but it's more vague
and less detailed and Um, but it's, it's related
in some way. Uh, SO that's one type, um.
It could also be that you're, you're, uh, you
say, yeah, I, I don't believe, I believe in
something, it's like a higher justice and then it's
like a more karmic I think, but so it
does not like Christianity, but. Just that it relates
to the traditionally these ideas. Yeah, and then, then
we have what we call uh New spirituality, something
which uh is more um Uh, connected to forms
of spirituality like um, Nature's spirituality or wellness culture
or Yeah. Other, um, and, uh, and other types
of, types of spirituality and with um And uh
of course then we have, if you do yoga,
you could be like in the middle between between
your spirituality and the old religion and that's, so
I mean, so this is more like to, to,
to uh uh structure things uh intellectually I guess
like yeah. Uh, LIKE, ideal types more than it
is, so, and the, and it's not like strict
emission standard that, that you expect to find in,
in reality. It's just up to, to order. Uh,
TO, to make it a typology so we could,
uh, think about it with, with some clarity or
something, yeah. Uh, AND the third type, uh, uh,
which It's put on the, highlighted in the book
is um life question something it's, it's when you
You just use um. You give a vague answer
to a life question like do you believe in
the afterlife? Well, I'm not really, I, I, I
believe in, I perhaps I don't believe in heaven
or hell or perhaps I don't believe in, in
reincarnation, but I believe in something, something, uh, that's
that there is some justice, uh, after death, yeah,
that they. And then there's, so that's uh the
third kind, uh. Looking into for this,
right, so earlier you mentioned that one of the
questions that you explore has to do with rationality.
I mean whether uh this process or the sort
of intellect intellectual intellectual journey that people go from.
Uh, uh, GO on from a more detailed religious
view to abstract claims and claiming that they believe
in something, whatever that something is. I mean, is
this a rational process? Is it rational to believe
in something?
Oh, that's, uh, that's actually a, a great question.
Uh, BECAUSE, uh, uh, first of all, uh, the,
the process can, can, uh, Can look quite different,
uh, I mean there's so many versions of this
process, but we, in general we think of this
as, uh, As, uh, thinning as uh we think
of the content of something is something thin, so
it's thinning content and then that's the process to
to reach such is thinning. So, uh, everything that
uh Uh, there are at least Three major ways
where you can thin your, your, uh Worldview in
this way and first of all it's, it's uh
because and, and, and, and this seems to be
mostly connected to what we said when you're when
you're something is mis connected to some traditional religion
which you have moved away from and the more
abstract you. Well, You certainly must have had some
reason to do this move from the uh detail
to, to the more general or abstract. Uh, AND,
uh, it might have been uh. Intellectual reasons you
might have uh encountered like uh Um, intellectual objections
to what you originally believed. Perhaps you, you. Lived
in God and that you. The problem of evil
made you uh Realize that this traditional picture of
well it can't be true. There has to be
some. But I still believe in something godlike, but
perhaps it's not, uh, and then you just, uh,
so you, um, and that, I mean that could
be one reason to, to move in a more
abstract way, I believe in something, something like God,
something powerful and good but not perhaps. Uh, OMNIPOTENT
or and perfectly good, uh. And then we, we
say that, or perhaps you have pragmatic reasons. Perhaps
you, you, you, uh. Become a feminist theologian and
you think that this Traditional talk about God is
to uh Patriarchal and you have to, so you,
you can't really accept the traditional view of God
and then you have to move to something less
so you can have this kind of pragmatic reasons
as well, I think, but, but they both indicate
that you find the tradition unacceptable for some, some
reason and uh. Uh, YOU feel that you have
to move in a more, or, or, or you
solve these problems by moving in a more general
direction, right, uh. And I mean that's uh, that
should not be conflated with uh another kind of
move to, to a thin content which is perhaps
a more uh often connected with this spirituality, something
is, and that's has to do with, with uh
when you can, when you experience things which you
feel you cannot adequately put into words. So you,
uh, like, uh. You, you're hiking in this beautiful
landscape, and you are deeply moved and you feel
this strong spiritual experience, and you feel that you
can't really put it into words. Mhm Uh, AND
if you take words from tradition, from traditional religious
words, they don't really fit, and, and like describing
it as in psychological terms, it doesn't really fit
either, so, oh, it's something, it's like, uh, it's
like it's, it's almost like if it was holy
so I mean you move this, uh, uh, you,
you make it vague, but, but because. If it
was literally, you, you, you would have to say
that no, that's not it. Uh, YEAH, so that's
another, uh, another, uh, reason you could, uh, want
to move in this direction. Mhm Uh, AND the
third is, uh, is simply ignorance. Uh, IT might
be that you would like to have a detailed
view, but you. Failed to come up with one
you would like to, to answer. Uh The question,
what, what's the meaning of life, but you. You
cannot articulate one an answer you, you, you. You
find acceptable and then you, you go vague. Well,
I, I believe there's something, I mean, we have
to. Take care of each other right and um
figure out why we're here and and you know
something like even vehicles because you can't come up
with one specific. And that, uh, so that will
be the 3rd way. And In What sense can
this be rational? Mm. Well, first of all, uh,
It In, uh, if you look at this from
a philosophical perspective, it's really important. To distinguish if
this move has to do with vagueness or generality.
Because, uh, vagueness is, uh, according to most philosophers,
something we should avoid, you know, speech because It
makes it Sort of uh Uh. Uh, IT makes
it hard to, to, to know exactly what we
mean. And exactly what the words refer to, and
that makes it hard to see if they are
true or false. Mhm. Uh, SO like, yeah. I
mean, the, the, uh, classic example is how, how
much hair can you have and still be bald.
I mean bald is a vague term and it's
not any, uh, definite, um. A border between being
bold and that it, that's a vague term and
that's. That's kind of bad if you want to,
to make like this uh deductive argument that says
that um. Says something about the ball about being
bald because then you don't know if if the
conclusion follows from that. Premises or not. So that's,
that's something philosopher teaches us to avoid. Uh, BUT
it, but the generality on the other hand, it
just makes, uh, or it is more probable. Uh,
SO if you, if you say that. I believe
that the transcendent reality exists. That's a very general
statement. And if any of this the major religious
claims we know about is true, if The traditionally
Christian or uh Muslim Abrahamic God exists and it's
true if uh there's a Kormic reincarnation and Buddha
fields and whatever that that's and it's true if,
if, if, uh, some uh polytheistic pantheon exists and
it's true that there's a so. It's like, you
know, it's like hedging um and uh hedging your
bets on the. What, how, however the world turns
out, if you, if you have, if you only
believe very general statements, you will always be right,
right? Uh, SO that's uh. And I mean that's
not really uh Objectionable However, it's. Uh As Not.
I mean, if you only follow this principle. You
will have, also have a quite impoverished intellectual life
uh because um There's also this competing idea. Which
Uh Uh, I mean, for, for example, uh, we
have the famous, um, American pragmatist William Yams has
said that we have two epistemic duties we should.
Shun falsehoods and believe truths. So if you also
all, if you only shun falsehoods. Uh, WE will
Uh And not try to balance that with believing
in truth, we will just It will end up
with very few or in this case very general
beliefs. Uh, SO it's, so it's, it's also important
that we If we add information. If we add
details, we will have much more. I mean, the
risk of being wrong. And having false beliefs, it
increases, but at the same time, Uh, As that
risk increases, we will get more information and our
beliefs will be more useful in both, both intellectually
and practically. Uh, So you would like to in.
Most cases you want to strike a balance between
thinning, as we call it, and keeping with uh
um. Uh, KEEPING details or adding details to your
view. And that's why it seems that the In
some sense, it's more reasonable to be uh uh
what we call a qualified somethings than a than
a pure somethings because The qualified something keeps details
or have some details which makes uh These ideas
more relevant for thought in thought and in action,
and that's And as I said, it seems that
most. Actual nons or something. They do not have
this pure philosophical ideas that we have, but the
more qualified versions of that. And uh they, they
seem right to, to, to, to move in that
direction. Yeah, yeah
So, um, another thing that you talk about in
your book, uh, has to do with non-doxasticism. So,
uh, what is non-ox doxasticism and what is the
relationship between it and something is?
Uh, YEAH, non-exoticism, uh, which is really my, um,
My main area of research and how I, uh,
how I got uh. But in this, uh, from
the beginning, um. It was it's about. Attitudes which
are weaker than belief. But which are still epistemic
attitudes by which we, we can orient ourselves in,
in uh Um, yeah, it's, it's also an action.
Uh, SO in, in religious religious setting, uh, we,
we talk about religious non-exoticis. And then we, we
have, uh, and that, that's basically rejecting the idea
that religious faith must be based on belief. And
instead we say that religious faith can believe, religious
faith can be based on hope. It can be
based or perhaps. Acceptance or there are a lot
of ideas what could replace. Uh, Belief in in
faith in, in, in this uh In this field,
but, but the main idea is that we can
have some, some weaker attitude than belief and still.
Positively engaged with, with religion. Mhm. Uh, So if
you compare that to, to, to what the the
Move off Uh, the something is of the, uh,
the, the somethingists are doing when they thin their
content because they find it unacceptable. Uh, WE can
say that think of, uh, non-roasticism as a feeling
of attitude instead of content. So if you have
this, uh, traditional. Image of the Christian God and
you do not feel that you can believe in
this anymore. How can you do? Well, you can
do like something is do and you can thin.
Uh, THE contents. And start to believe in something
more general. Hopefully or something more vague if you're
Uh, take, take that the easy way, but you
shouldn't, and, or you could, you could have. Use
the non-toxic. Uh, PATH there and senior attitude instead.
So instead of believing, uh, in the Christian God,
you can say that I Well, there are Some
heavy reasons which makes it impossible for me to
believe in the Christian God, but I, I still
hope that the Christian God exists. Or I, I,
um. Or my religion is very important to me
and since it has not been established as a
Christian God does not exist. I choose to accept.
The Christian worldview in my faith. So then you're
a noasticist. Mhm. So you keep the, the details,
but you, you, uh, lower, you, you, you, you
change to a um weaker. Epistemic state is that.
Uh, SO we can think of this as, um,
I mean, it's possible to think of this as
competing ways of, uh, of handling the problem, uh.
But I mean for some people, they, they, I,
I think they can also be Complementary, you can
uh Perhaps, uh. There are parts of your If
you're in this tradition and you feel that You
cannot believe it anymore. Perhaps there are parts which
you feel that you, you have to get rid
of this porch and you move in a more
general way, but other parts you feel strongly attached
to, but you don't really believe that them either.
But then you feel that you, it's, you can
accept them or or hope for them. So I
mean that's, that's also possible, possible. Way forward, I
think. I don't think that. In general, one is
better than the other. But I do think that
uh nonoxastasis has this uh Perhaps as an advantage.
Insofar as it lets us keep more details and
details are Uh. Not unimportant when it comes to
to to have to having a religious life, for
example, uh, or so that's Perhaps, uh, non existence
has some advantage there, but I, I, but that
not on epistemic grounds, I, I think that they
are, uh, both, uh. Equally acceptable Right.
So I have uh a couple more questions and
they are all interrelated. I mean, I want to
ask you now more about the existential aspect of
somethingism. So, uh, do you think that something is
um can manage to provide us with, uh, Comfort
and guidance in this life, I mean, can it
manage the existential challenge of that of providing, providing
us with comfort and uh guidance or not?
Uh, WELL, I, first of all, um, As I,
as I said, uh, details are not without importance
here, uh, and, uh. I think that the uh
the. Pure something uh. It's presumably Not in a
very strong position when it comes to existential issues.
Uh, WHEN it comes to the more qualified versions,
I think we have to, to. I mean that
has to be decided on a case to case
basis in relation to to to to the exact
existential issues at hand, but Uh It also seems
that In general, something is will be in a
worse position, the traditional religion. Uh, AND that's um.
Not only because it's uh. Lacking in details, but,
but also because in when it comes to existential
existential matters. It's often also the stories which are
um connected to the traditional views which uh people
find really comforting and, and helping in, in, in,
in trying times like uh Uh, in People in
the stories about people in the, the people in
the, in the Bible, the Old Testament, and Jesus
and the apostles, if you're a Christian. I have
a Or in Islam, you have uh Muham the
stories about Muhammad and the first caliphs and the,
the Hadi tradition or The stories about the gods
and traditional polytheism, I mean, that's really relatable. Uh,
AND, um. Many people, uh, find, I mean, find
comforting in that kind of story, and that, that's
not something. Um, YOU can't move very, even if
you're an old religion, something is, you cannot move
very far from your Tradition and still. Keep this,
I mean. OK Um. If you, if you keep
the stories, it's like uh it, it, it, it
becomes kind of uh Uncertain how to define Uh,
what you're up to. If you, uh, OK, I,
I don't believe in something. I believe in a,
in a person, uh, in a, uh. I believe
in something, a personal strong force, not to conflate
with the Christian God, but I still read all
the stories in the Bible. I think that they
are very. And then it's like, but aren't you
Christian? Uh. So it's um, yeah. Um And I
think that's, oh, perhaps you can. On the other
hand, there are nuns who are more uh what
uh something called a remixed, who, who picks stories
and parts from a multitude of traditions. Uh, AND
I mean that's obviously one way forward here if
you have uh. Have this, uh, uh, if you
have a more general view, of course, more More
religious stories will Uh, fit with your, um, With
what you believe, uh. Like, um If you only
believe that there is some. Transcendent reality. Perhaps it's
personal with the deities, but it's, I mean, it
doesn't really matter if it's Jesus or uh. Vishnu
or uh Or a chembalistic angel who figures in
your in your stories because, because, uh Your, your
view is general enough to accommodate for all of
that and you. While you perhaps do not take
them, like literally, you think that. There's something here,
and Uh, it's still. Possible to, to, to relate
to the human persons in this story which encounters
the divine and that's That might be, um, so
I think that, uh, yeah, so, so perhaps presumably
it's better to be a bit more uh. Um,
TO be. Bit more of a mixture and things
uh Take the story which you, which you, which
fits with your, with your view. Uh, BUT yeah,
then, but of course we have this, uh, as
I said before that if you, if you only
pick your views from one source and it's gonna
be a question if you're, if you're not really,
if you're really are something is or and then
on and not. He's a traditionally religious person who
doesn't really feel comfortable with articulating your, your, yeah.
Right, so I mean, just one last question then,
but, but do you think that there are any
instances where something is might provide people with the
necessary resources for them to cope with existential problems
or. Not, I mean, I mean, of course, I,
I guess it depends again, it depends on what
you believe in, right, but uh do you think
that there are instances where it can actually provide
the necessary resources for, for us to deal with
existential questions?
Uh. Yeah, I, I, I do, and uh. I
think that the prime examples here is Uh, the
different versions of life question something is when you,
when you have, when you turn to something is.
Simply to, to answer a life question or, I
mean, Because the life questions, the concern is existential
issues. So if you So if you have this
kind of view, you, the view is more or
less tailor-made just to, to uh answer um. One
or several specific. Uh, SPECIFIC existential issues. Uh And
uh so when you have that, your, your view
will be uh It will have been made with
that in mind. Like, uh, for example, what we
mentioned earlier, if you, you might be. Uh, I
have a view which only concerns the afterlife. Right,
uh, that's, that perhaps you, you, that's, that's what
you think about. That's what's relevant for you. You
say, well, you think that something exists and that,
uh, some kind of justice in the life, and
that's. Presumably, um, Uh, enough to keep you, um.
Existentially, uh. Uh, SATISFIED or at least more satisfied
than if you had nothing, uh, when it comes
to, to that, to that issue, so, uh. On
the other hand, uh, And once again, if you
have only pure something is. It's very hard to
see how you could get. And a stronger support.
In life from, from that, uh, even if you
have, if, if, even if you relieved that the
transcendent reality exists. Uh And And you only believe
that you will lack. And I believe that is,
that is transcendent reality is Um Has anything to
do with, with your life. Uh, OR has anything
to do with, uh, uh, That it's relevant for
existential issues. I mean, it could be. Because it's
fully possible, of course, that there could be a
transcendent reality which is Uh, completely, um, which has
nothing to do with humans at all. We could
still be a cosmic byproduct. Right, their lives could
have no meaning in the joke in the, in
the biggest scheme of things, even though there is
a transcendent reality result so. So this is uh
very general, very bare uh view will not. Get
you um anywhere existentially, uh, but I think that
here the details are presumably more important for existential
issues than they are for uh. Uh, INTELLECTUAL rationality,
I would say for,
for epistemological issues,
yeah, yeah, exactly. Mhm.
OK, so the book is again semi-secular worldviews and
the belief in something Beyond. I'm going to link
to leave a link to it in the description
of the interview. And Dr. Palmquist, uh, just before
we go, uh, apart from the book, are there
any places on the internet where people can find
you and your work?
Well, I think that my work is most easily
uh found if you go to uh Google Scholar
and just uh search for my name. Uh, BUT
also, of course, it's, uh, you can, uh, check
me out on Lund University's, uh, homepage, uh, but
Google Scholar is presumably the best way to, to,
to. Find out more about what I, what I've
been doing, yeah.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Yeah, thank you very much for having me once
again. It's been, uh, super interesting.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Ale Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, Jo Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Janaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stinnik,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.